Chapter 8
I couldn’t sleep all night; a fog-horn was
groaning incessantly on the Sound, and I tossed
half-sick between grotesque reality and savage,
frightening dreams. Toward dawn I heard a
taxi go up Gatsby’s drive, and immediately
I jumped out of bed and began to dress — I
felt that I had something to tell him, something
to warn him about, and morning would be too
late.
Crossing his lawn, I saw that his front door
was still open and he was leaning against
a table in the hall, heavy with dejection
or sleep.
“Nothing happened,” he said wanly. “I
waited, and about four o’clock she came
to the window and stood there for a minute
and then turned out the light.”
His house had never seemed so enormous to
me as it did that night when we hunted through
the great rooms for cigarettes. We pushed
aside curtains that were like pavilions, and
felt over innumerable feet of dark wall for
electric light switches — once I tumbled
with a sort of splash upon the keys of a ghostly
piano. There was an inexplicable amount of
dust everywhere, and the rooms were musty,
as though they hadn’t been aired for many
days. I found the humidor on an unfamiliar
table, with two stale, dry cigarettes inside.
Throwing open the French windows of the drawing-room,
we sat smoking out into the darkness.
“You ought to go away,” I said. “It’s
pretty certain they’ll trace your car.”
“Go away now, old sport?”
“Go to Atlantic City for a week, or up to
Montreal.”
He wouldn’t consider it. He couldn’t possibly
leave Daisy until he knew what she was going
to do. He was clutching at some last hope
and I couldn’t bear to shake him free.
It was this night that he told me the strange
story of his youth with Dan Cody — told
it to me because “Jay Gatsby.” had broken
up like glass against Tom’s hard malice,
and the long secret extravaganza was played
out. I think that he would have acknowledged
anything now, without reserve, but he wanted
to talk about Daisy.
She was the first “nice” girl he had ever
known. In various unrevealed capacities he
had come in contact with such people, but
always with indiscernible barbed wire between.
He found her excitingly desirable. He went
to her house, at first with other officers
from Camp Taylor, then alone. It amazed him
— he had never been in such a beautiful
house before, but what gave it an air of breathless
intensity, was that Daisy lived there — it
was as casual a thing to her as his tent out
at camp was to him. There was a ripe mystery
about it, a hint of bedrooms up-stairs more
beautiful and cool than other bedrooms, of
gay and radiant activities taking place through
its corridors, and of romances that were not
musty and laid away already in lavender but
fresh and breathing and redolent of this year’s
shining motor-cars and of dances whose flowers
were scarcely withered. It excited him, too,
that many men had already loved Daisy — it
increased her value in his eyes. He felt their
presence all about the house, pervading the
air with the shades and echoes of still vibrant
emotions.
But he knew that he was in Daisy’s house
by a colossal accident. However glorious might
be his future as Jay Gatsby, he was at present
a penniless young man without a past, and
at any moment the invisible cloak of his uniform
might slip from his shoulders. So he made
the most of his time. He took what he could
get, ravenously and unscrupulously — eventually
he took Daisy one still October night, took
her because he had no real right to touch
her hand.
He might have despised himself, for he had
certainly taken her under false pretenses.
I don’t mean that he had traded on his phantom
millions, but he had deliberately given Daisy
a sense of security; he let her believe that
he was a person from much the same stratum
as herself — that he was fully able to take
care of her. As a matter of fact, he had no
such facilities — he had no comfortable
family standing behind him, and he was liable
at the whim of an impersonal government to
be blown anywhere about the world.
But he didn’t despise himself and it didn’t
turn out as he had imagined. He had intended,
probably, to take what he could and go — but
now he found that he had committed himself
to the following of a grail. He knew that
Daisy was extraordinary, but he didn’t realize
just how extraordinary a “nice” girl could
be. She vanished into her rich house, into
her rich, full life, leaving Gatsby — nothing.
He felt married to her, that was all.
When they met again, two days later, it was
Gatsby who was breathless, who was, somehow,
betrayed. Her porch was bright with the bought
luxury of star-shine; the wicker of the settee
squeaked fashionably as she turned toward
him and he kissed her curious and lovely mouth.
She had caught a cold, and it made her voice
huskier and more charming than ever, and Gatsby
was overwhelmingly aware of the youth and
mystery that wealth imprisons and preserves,
of the freshness of many clothes, and of Daisy,
gleaming like silver, safe and proud above
the hot struggles of the poor.
“I can’t describe to you how surprised
I was to find out I loved her, old sport.
I even hoped for a while that she’d throw
me over, but she didn’t, because she was
in love with me too. She thought I knew a
lot because I knew different things from her.
. . . Well, there I was, ‘way off my ambitions,
getting deeper in love every minute, and all
of a sudden I didn’t care. What was the
use of doing great things if I could have
a better time telling her what I was going
to do?” On the last afternoon before he
went abroad, he sat with Daisy in his arms
for a long, silent time. It was a cold fall
day, with fire in the room and her cheeks
flushed. Now and then she moved and he changed
his arm a little, and once he kissed her dark
shining hair. The afternoon had made them
tranquil for a while, as if to give them a
deep memory for the long parting the next
day promised. They had never been closer in
their month of love, nor communicated more
profoundly one with another, than when she
brushed silent lips against his coat’s shoulder
or when he touched the end of her fingers,
gently, as though she were asleep.
He did extraordinarily well in the war. He
was a captain before he went to the front,
and following the Argonne battles he got his
majority and the command of the divisional
machine-guns. After the Armistice he tried
frantically to get home, but some complication
or misunderstanding sent him to Oxford instead.
He was worried now — there was a quality
of nervous despair in Daisy’s letters. She
didn’t see why he couldn’t come. She was
feeling the pressure of the world outside,
and she wanted to see him and feel his presence
beside her and be reassured that she was doing
the right thing after all.
For Daisy was young and her artificial world
was redolent of orchids and pleasant, cheerful
snobbery and orchestras which set the rhythm
of the year, summing up the sadness and suggestiveness
of life in new tunes. All night the saxophones
wailed the hopeless comment of the Beale Street
Blues while a hundred pairs of golden and
silver slippers shuffled the shining dust.
At the gray tea hour there were always rooms
that throbbed incessantly with this low, sweet
fever, while fresh faces drifted here and
there like rose petals blown by the sad horns
around the floor.
Through this twilight universe Daisy began
to move again with the season; suddenly she
was again keeping half a dozen dates a day
with half a dozen men, and drowsing asleep
at dawn with the beads and chiffon of an evening
dress tangled among dying orchids on the floor
beside her bed. And all the time something
within her was crying for a decision. She
wanted her life shaped now, immediately — and
the decision must be made by some force — of
love, of money, of unquestionable practicality
— that was close at hand.
That force took shape in the middle of spring
with the arrival of Tom Buchanan. There was
a wholesome bulkiness about his person and
his position, and Daisy was flattered. Doubtless
there was a certain struggle and a certain
relief. The letter reached Gatsby while he
was still at Oxford.
It was dawn now on Long Island and we went
about opening the rest of the windows down-stairs,
filling the house with gray-turning, gold-turning
light. The shadow of a tree fell abruptly
across the dew and ghostly birds began to
sing among the blue leaves. There was a slow,
pleasant movement in the air, scarcely a wind,
promising a cool, lovely day.
“I don’t think she ever loved him.”
Gatsby turned around from a window and looked
at me challengingly. “You must remember,
old sport, she was very excited this afternoon.
He told her those things in a way that frightened
her — that made it look as if I was some
kind of cheap sharper. And the result was
she hardly knew what she was saying.”
He sat down gloomily.
“Of course she might have loved him just
for a minute, when they were first married
— and loved me more even then, do you see?”
Suddenly he came out with a curious remark.
“In any case,” he said, “it was just
personal.”
What could you make of that, except to suspect
some intensity in his conception of the affair
that couldn’t be measured?
He came back from France when Tom and Daisy
were still on their wedding trip, and made
a miserable but irresistible journey to Louisville
on the last of his army pay. He stayed there
a week, walking the streets where their footsteps
had clicked together through the November
night and revisiting the out-of-the-way places
to which they had driven in her white car.
Just as Daisy’s house had always seemed
to him more mysterious and gay than other
houses, so his idea of the city itself, even
though she was gone from it, was pervaded
with a melancholy beauty.
He left feeling that if he had searched harder,
he might have found her — that he was leaving
her behind. The day-coach — he was penniless
now — was hot. He went out to the open vestibule
and sat down on a folding-chair, and the station
slid away and the backs of unfamiliar buildings
moved by. Then out into the spring fields,
where a yellow trolley raced them for a minute
with people in it who might once have seen
the pale magic of her face along the casual
street.
The track curved and now it was going away
from the sun, which as it sank lower, seemed
to spread itself in benediction over the vanishing
city where she had drawn her breath. He stretched
out his hand desperately as if to snatch only
a wisp of air, to save a fragment of the spot
that she had made lovely for him. But it was
all going by too fast now for his blurred
eyes and he knew that he had lost that part
of it, the freshest and the best, forever.
It was nine o’clock when we finished breakfast
and went out on the porch. The night had made
a sharp difference in the weather and there
was an autumn flavor in the air. The gardener,
the last one of Gatsby’s former servants,
came to the foot of the steps.
“I’m going to drain the pool to-day, Mr.
Gatsby. Leaves’ll start falling pretty soon,
and then there’s always trouble with the
pipes.”
“Don’t do it to-day,” Gatsby answered.
He turned to me apologetically. “You know,
old sport, I’ve never used that pool all
summer?”
I looked at my watch and stood up.
“Twelve minutes to my train.”
I didn’t want to go to the city. I wasn’t
worth a decent stroke of work, but it was
more than that — I didn’t want to leave
Gatsby. I missed that train, and then another,
before I could get myself away.
“I’ll call you up,” I said finally.
“Do, old sport.”
“I’ll call you about noon.”
We walked slowly down the steps.
“I suppose Daisy’ll call too.” He looked
at me anxiously, as if he hoped I’d corroborate
this.
“I suppose so.”
“Well, good-by.”
We shook hands and I started away. Just before
I reached the hedge I remembered something
and turned around.
“They’re a rotten crowd,” I shouted
across the lawn. “You’re worth the whole
damn bunch put together.”
I’ve always been glad I said that. It was
the only compliment I ever gave him, because
I disapproved of him from beginning to end.
First he nodded politely, and then his face
broke into that radiant and understanding
smile, as if we’d been in ecstatic cahoots
on that fact all the time. His gorgeous pink
rag of a suit made a bright spot of color
against the white steps, and I thought of
the night when I first came to his ancestral
home, three months before. The lawn and drive
had been crowded with the faces of those who
guessed at his corruption — and he had stood
on those steps, concealing his incorruptible
dream, as he waved them good-by.
I thanked him for his hospitality. We were
always thanking him for that — I and the
others.
“Good-by,” I called. “I enjoyed breakfast,
Gatsby.”
Up in the city, I tried for a while to list
the quotations on an interminable amount of
stock, then I fell asleep in my swivel-chair.
Just before noon the phone woke me, and I
started up with sweat breaking out on my forehead.
It was Jordan Baker; she often called me up
at this hour because the uncertainty of her
own movements between hotels and clubs and
private houses made her hard to find in any
other way. Usually her voice came over the
wire as something fresh and cool, as if a
divot from a green golf-links had come sailing
in at the office window, but this morning
it seemed harsh and dry.
“I’ve left Daisy’s house,” she said.
“I’m at Hempstead, and I’m going down
to Southampton this afternoon.”
Probably it had been tactful to leave Daisy’s
house, but the act annoyed me, and her next
remark made me rigid.
“You weren’t so nice to me last night.”
“How could it have mattered then?”
Silence for a moment. Then:
“However — I want to see you.”
“I want to see you, too.”
“Suppose I don’t go to Southampton, and
come into town this afternoon?”
“No — I don’t think this afternoon.”
“Very well.”
“It’s impossible this afternoon. Various
——”
We talked like that for a while, and then
abruptly we weren’t talking any longer.
I don’t know which of us hung up with a
sharp click, but I know I didn’t care. I
couldn’t have talked to her across a tea-table
that day if I never talked to her again in
this world.
I called Gatsby’s house a few minutes later,
but the line was busy. I tried four times;
finally an exasperated central told me the
wire was being kept open for long distance
from Detroit. Taking out my time-table, I
drew a small circle around the three-fifty
train. Then I leaned back in my chair and
tried to think. It was just noon.
When I passed the ashheaps on the train that
morning I had crossed deliberately to the
other side of the car. I suppose there’d
be a curious crowd around there all day with
little boys searching for dark spots in the
dust, and some garrulous man telling over
and over what had happened, until it became
less and less real even to him and he could
tell it no longer, and Myrtle Wilson’s tragic
achievement was forgotten. Now I want to go
back a little and tell what happened at the
garage after we left there the night before.
They had difficulty in locating the sister,
Catherine. She must have broken her rule against
drinking that night, for when she arrived
she was stupid with liquor and unable to understand
that the ambulance had already gone to Flushing.
When they convinced her of this, she immediately
fainted, as if that was the intolerable part
of the affair. Some one, kind or curious,
took her in his car and drove her in the wake
of her sister’s body.
Until long after midnight a changing crowd
lapped up against the front of the garage,
while George Wilson rocked himself back and
forth on the couch inside. For a while the
door of the office was open, and every one
who came into the garage glanced irresistibly
through it. Finally someone said it was a
shame, and closed the door. Michaelis and
several other men were with him; first, four
or five men, later two or three men. Still
later Michaelis had to ask the last stranger
to wait there fifteen minutes longer, while
he went back to his own place and made a pot
of coffee. After that, he stayed there alone
with Wilson until dawn.
About three o’clock the quality of Wilson’s
incoherent muttering changed — he grew quieter
and began to talk about the yellow car. He
announced that he had a way of finding out
whom the yellow car belonged to, and then
he blurted out that a couple of months ago
his wife had come from the city with her face
bruised and her nose swollen.
But when he heard himself say this, he flinched
and began to cry “Oh, my God!” again in
his groaning voice. Michaelis made a clumsy
attempt to distract him.
“How long have you been married, George?
Come on there, try and sit still a minute
and answer my question. How long have you
been married?”
“Twelve years.”
“Ever had any children? Come on, George,
sit still — I asked you a question. Did
you ever have any children?”
The hard brown beetles kept thudding against
the dull light, and whenever Michaelis heard
a car go tearing along the road outside it
sounded to him like the car that hadn’t
stopped a few hours before. He didn’t like
to go into the garage, because the work bench
was stained where the body had been lying,
so he moved uncomfortably around the office
— he knew every object in it before morning
— and from time to time sat down beside
Wilson trying to keep him more quiet.
“Have you got a church you go to sometimes,
George? Maybe even if you haven’t been there
for a long time? Maybe I could call up the
church and get a priest to come over and he
could talk to you, see?”
“Don’t belong to any.”
“You ought to have a church, George, for
times like this. You must have gone to church
once. Didn’t you get married in a church?
Listen, George, listen to me. Didn’t you
get married in a church?”
“That was a long time ago.”
The effort of answering broke the rhythm of
his rocking — for a moment he was silent.
Then the same half-knowing, half-bewildered
look came back into his faded eyes.
“Look in the drawer there,” he said, pointing
at the desk.
“Which drawer?”
“That drawer — that one.”
Michaelis opened the drawer nearest his hand.
There was nothing in it but a small, expensive
dog-leash, made of leather and braided silver.
It was apparently new.
“This?” he inquired, holding it up.
Wilson stared and nodded.
“I found it yesterday afternoon. She tried
to tell me about it, but I knew it was something
funny.”
“You mean your wife bought it?”
“She had it wrapped in tissue paper on her
bureau.”
Michaelis didn’t see anything odd in that,
and he gave Wilson a dozen reasons why his
wife might have bought the dog-leash. But
conceivably Wilson had heard some of these
same explanations before, from Myrtle, because
he began saying “Oh, my God!” again in
a whisper — his comforter left several explanations
in the air.
“Then he killed her,” said Wilson. His
mouth dropped open suddenly.
“Who did?”
“I have a way of finding out.”
“You’re morbid, George,” said his friend.
“This has been a strain to you and you don’t
know what you’re saying. You’d better
try and sit quiet till morning.”
“He murdered her.”
“It was an accident, George.”
Wilson shook his head. His eyes narrowed and
his mouth widened slightly with the ghost
of a superior “Hm!”
“I know,” he said definitely, “I’m
one of these trusting fellas and I don’t
think any harm to nobody, but when I get to
know a thing I know it. It was the man in
that car. She ran out to speak to him and
he wouldn’t stop.”
Michaelis had seen this too, but it hadn’t
occurred to him that there was any special
significance in it. He believed that Mrs.
Wilson had been running away from her husband,
rather than trying to stop any particular
car.
“How could she of been like that?”
“She’s a deep one,” said Wilson, as
if that answered the question. “Ah-h-h ——”
He began to rock again, and Michaelis stood
twisting the leash in his hand.
“Maybe you got some friend that I could
telephone for, George?”
This was a forlorn hope — he was almost
sure that Wilson had no friend: there was
not enough of him for his wife. He was glad
a little later when he noticed a change in
the room, a blue quickening by the window,
and realized that dawn wasn’t far off. About
five o’clock it was blue enough outside
to snap off the light.
Wilson’s glazed eyes turned out to the ashheaps,
where small gray clouds took on fantastic
shape and scurried here and there in the faint
dawn wind.
“I spoke to her,” he muttered, after a
long silence. “I told her she might fool
me but she couldn’t fool God. I took her
to the window.”— with an effort he got
up and walked to the rear window and leaned
with his face pressed against it ——” and
I said ‘God knows what you’ve been doing,
everything you’ve been doing. You may fool
me, but you can’t fool God!’”
Standing behind him, Michaelis saw with a
shock that he was looking at the eyes of Doctor
T. J. Eckleburg, which had just emerged, pale
and enormous, from the dissolving night.
“God sees everything,” repeated Wilson.
“That’s an advertisement,” Michaelis
assured him. Something made him turn away
from the window and look back into the room.
But Wilson stood there a long time, his face
close to the window pane, nodding into the
twilight.
By six o’clock Michaelis was worn out, and
grateful for the sound of a car stopping outside.
It was one of the watchers of the night before
who had promised to come back, so he cooked
breakfast for three, which he and the other
man ate together. Wilson was quieter now,
and Michaelis went home to sleep; when he
awoke four hours later and hurried back to
the garage, Wilson was gone.
His movements — he was on foot all the time
— were afterward traced to Port Roosevelt
and then to Gad’s Hill, where he bought
a sandwich that he didn’t eat, and a cup
of coffee. He must have been tired and walking
slowly, for he didn’t reach Gad’s Hill
until noon. Thus far there was no difficulty
in accounting for his time — there were
boys who had seen a man “acting sort of
crazy,” and motorists at whom he stared
oddly from the side of the road. Then for
three hours he disappeared from view. The
police, on the strength of what he said to
Michaelis, that he “had a way of finding
out,” supposed that he spent that time going
from garage to garage thereabout, inquiring
for a yellow car. On the other hand, no garage
man who had seen him ever came forward, and
perhaps he had an easier, surer way of finding
out what he wanted to know. By half-past two
he was in West Egg, where he asked someone
the way to Gatsby’s house. So by that time
he knew Gatsby’s name.
At two o’clock Gatsby put on his bathing-suit
and left word with the butler that if any
one phoned word was to be brought to him at
the pool. He stopped at the garage for a pneumatic
mattress that had amused his guests during
the summer, and the chauffeur helped him pump
it up. Then he gave instructions that the
open car wasn’t to be taken out under any
circumstances — and this was strange, because
the front right fender needed repair.
Gatsby shouldered the mattress and started
for the pool. Once he stopped and shifted
it a little, and the chauffeur asked him if
he needed help, but he shook his head and
in a moment disappeared among the yellowing
trees.
No telephone message arrived, but the butler
went without his sleep and waited for it until
four o’clock — until long after there
was any one to give it to if it came. I have
an idea that Gatsby himself didn’t believe
it would come, and perhaps he no longer cared.
If that was true he must have felt that he
had lost the old warm world, paid a high price
for living too long with a single dream. He
must have looked up at an unfamiliar sky through
frightening leaves and shivered as he found
what a grotesque thing a rose is and how raw
the sunlight was upon the scarcely created
grass. A new world, material without being
real, where poor ghosts, breathing dreams
like air, drifted fortuitously about . . . like
that ashen, fantastic figure gliding toward
him through the amorphous trees.
The chauffeur — he was one of Wolfsheim’s
proteges — heard the shots — afterward
he could only say that he hadn’t thought
anything much about them. I drove from the
station directly to Gatsby’s house and my
rushing anxiously up the front steps was the
first thing that alarmed any one. But they
knew then, I firmly believe. With scarcely
a word said, four of us, the chauffeur, butler,
gardener, and I, hurried down to the pool.
There was a faint, barely perceptible movement
of the water as the fresh flow from one end
urged its way toward the drain at the other
with little ripples that were hardly the shadows
of waves, the laden mattress moved irregularly
down the pool. A small gust of wind that scarcely
corrugated the surface was enough to disturb
its accidental course with its accidental
burden. The touch of a cluster of leaves revolved
it slowly, tracing, like the leg of compass,
a thin red circle in the water.
It was after we started with Gatsby toward
the house that the gardener saw Wilson’s
body a little way off in the grass, and the
holocaust was complete.